% Chapter 04

Testing, Logging, Matching... so wird's gemacht!
================================================

It might seem a bit early to talk about those topics but it is a good spot for
Rust because these features are often used while writing initial code. We will
also talk about error handling, which you will encounter sooner or later as it
is quite different from most of today's programming languages.

<small>This chapter will not discuss things like debugging running executables
(e.g., with Valgrind).</small>

Tests and linkage attributes
----------------------------

Okay so first, Rust packs a built-in testing/benching framework &ndash; an
approach that might seem familiar to people coming from Ruby.

In order to use it, you will need to preappend the `#[test]` compiler attribute
(notice the # and brackets syntax) to a function that will serve as test.

Here is one:

~~~~rust
#[test]
fn try_fetch() {
    if external::input() == -1 {
        fail!("Couldn't retrieve the result!");
    }
}
~~~~

These functions &ndash; just like blocks or statements marked with the
`#[cfg(test)]` compiler attribute &ndash; will not be part of the default compiled
code. This way, you can keep your files tidy by placing the tests relating to a
specific part of your program at the bottom of the corresponding file.

Doing it wrong
--------------

Test functions are blackboxes: they have no arguments nor returns.  
Besides `fail!` that halts the program and displays the error message passed as
argument, tests are often made of assertions: the `assert!` macro takes a
boolean expression as parameter; it does nothing if it evaluates to true and
fails when it's false. `assert_eq!` is a variant takes 2 variables as parameters
and asserts equality.

~~~~rust
use std::ascii::OwnedStrAsciiExt;

#[test]
fn lowercase_ascii() {
    let tmp = ~"ME";
    assert_eq!(~"me", tmp.into_ascii_lower());
}
~~~~

Now, we just have to call `rustc --test` with the name of our file, and run it.

That is how the output looks like (when everything is fine, that is):

~~~~bash
running 1 test

test lowercase_ascii ... ok

test result: ok. 1 passed; 0 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured
~~~~

There is also `#[bench]` for benchmarking certain functions. These features are
largely used in the Rust compiler itself to avoid any regression during the
development process.

**Note:** if you are running your program in debugging mode (that is, with
`RUST_LOG` cmdline parameter defined to level 1/2/3/4), `error!` `warn!` `info!`
`debug!` will get triggered depending on the logging level.

Moving on about error handling
------------------------------

Rust does not have "opt-in" error handling (well, it trys to avoid opt-in safety
measures when possible); that is, it works with the use of an `Option` wrapper
directly in the function declaration.

Here are its possible values as defined in an `enum` (C-like cases enumerator):

~~~~rust
enum Option<T> {
    Some(T),
    None
}
~~~~

**Note:** if you are coming from C++, you will recognize those `<>` which denote
polymorphism, i.e. a method that applies to various variable types (`T` being
a lambda type). We will go back on those notions and on the `trait` concept in
a later chapter.

So, an `Option` type encapsulating a certain type of variable will return
`Some()` if a value gets catched or `None` if nothing passes through it.

Now let's go about doing error handling, what we must do is destructuring those
types so that we can make use of the value if we get one and also handle the
case where we would not get anything returned.

If you are a C user, you are probably thinking about the use of the `switch`
pattern?  
Well, Rust has a more powerful tool called `match`, for pattern matching.

The mainline Rust documentation has a good example to show its most basic
innards:

~~~~rust
match my_number {
    x if x < 0 => println!("something lower than zero"),
    0          => println!("zero"),
    1 | 2      => println!("one or two"),
    3..10      => println!("three to ten"),
    _          => println!("something else")
}
~~~~

Something that must be noted is that `match` must handle all possible cases for
it to compile.  
The wildcard `_` means: "for all (other) possible cases", so you will often have
to use it as the last option, unless you are, for example, matching over all the
individual components of an `enum`.

Here is how we would match against an `Option` value:

~~~~rust
match optional_arg {
    Some(val) => val,
    None => () // `nil`, the empty type
}
~~~~

If you remember, about assignments:

- We can assign a variable from a match statement, as shown before
- Otherwise, the pattern above will behave as an expression, i.e. as if we had
  written a `return` statement

We said that `match` was not the only way to destructure an `Option` type
before, and there is another way involving Rust's functional capatibilities.

~~~~rust
let optional_arg: Option<int> = get_option_val();

// this will remove the `Option` wrapper,
// i.e. return the value contained in `Some()` or fail
optional_arg.unwrap();

// this will unwrap or fail with the specified message in the `None` case
optional_arg.expect("No value returned!");
// this will return the value passed as parameter when encountering `None`
optional_arg.unwrap_or(3);
~~~~

**Note:** as you can see, error handling is not a big deal in the sense that you
can simply call an `.unwrap()` if you do not care much about the failing case.

This does not give you as much possibilities as with `match` but it covers the
common use case of `Option`. There [is also][option-doc] `.is_some()` or
`.is_none()` if you want to do conditionals.

Appendix: Getting decent `Result`s
----------------------------------

There is a variant to the `Option` type, called `Result`:

~~~~rust
enum Result<T, E> {
    Ok(T),
    Err(E)
}
~~~~

It is quite different from `Option`:

- As you can see, it returns an error message when it fails, which implies
  differences with `Option`...
- In fact, `Result` will handle cases when computation errors can occur (and
  even allow you to do different things depending on the error message) while
  `Option` handles cases when an argument can be missing, it's also used to pass
  NULL pointers to C, and so on...

Similarly to `Option`, `Result` [has][result-doc] the `is_ok()` and `is_err()`
methods.

Appendix: Can you `match` it?
-----------------------------

Pattern matching is pretty powerful, noticeably when coupled with the use of
tuples.  
Like in Python, tuples are heterogenous lists of elements (that is, with
different, unsequenced element types).

Tuples come also in handy, for example, when returning multiple values from a
function:

~~~~rust
fn main() {
    // type is ambiguous here and needs to be annotated
    let f: f32 = 1.0e-2;

    let (mantissa, exponent, sign) = f.integer_decode();
    println!("{}", mantissa);
}
~~~~

As an example, here is an implementation of [FizzBuzz] using pattern matching:

> Print numbers from 1 to 100, but for multiples of three print "Fizz" instead
> and for the multiples of five print "Buzz"; for multiples of both print
> "FizzBuzz".

~~~~rust
fn main() {
    for i in range(0u, 101) {
        match (i % 3 == 0, i % 5 == 0) {
            (true, true)   => println!("Fizz Buzz"),
            (true, false)  => println!("Fizz"),
            (false, true)  => println!("Buzz"),
            (false, false) => println!("{}", i)
        }
    }
}
~~~~

If you want to see more on this, there is a [whole article][fizzbuzz-rust] about
various ways to implement this program in Rust.

**Note:** you can match through `ref x` instead of `x` to get a reference
instead of a value (i.e. get a pointer referencing `x`) &ndash; some functions
will need referencing.

[option-doc]: http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/master/std/option/enum.Option.html
[result-doc]: http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/master/std/result/enum.Result.html
[FizzBuzz]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fizz_buzz
[fizzbuzz-rust]: http://composition.al/blog/2013/03/02/fizzbuzz-revisited/
[]:
