% Chapter 03

And so it begins!
=================

The starting point
------------------

So, you are learning a programming language... you know what that means?

~~~~rust
fn main() {
    println!("Hello World!");
}
~~~~

Yes, it is that simple. As you can see, functions are declared using the generic
`fn` keyword and for the C habitués, the return type&mdash;if any&mdash;is
specified as in ML, after an ASCII arrow, e.g., `fn random() -> int { ... }`.

To try it out on your own, save this code snippet and call `rustc`!

Now let's try something funny:

~~~~rust
fn main() {
    let out = "Hello World!";
    for c in out.chars() {
        /* spawn concurrent tasks! */
        do spawn {
            print!("{}", c);
        }
    }
}
~~~~

The looping point
-----------------

First, notice the loop syntax: for (each) `element` in `container`, as in
Python.  
Here, we make use of Rust's iterator type with `.chars()` to successively host
each char of the string (it used to be `.iter()`) so we can print those
directly.

What if we wanted to simply iterate a said number of times? Well, for that we
have a special container, the `range()` iterator.

~~~~rust
// Yields an iterator that will do `n` times, from 0 to n-1
// Note: using just `range(n)` is not possible just yet
for i in range(0, n) {}
// This one will go from 1 to n
for _ in range(1, n+1)
~~~~

As you can see, `range()` has exclusive upper bound, to be in line with 0-based
indexing.  
Notice the wildcard `_` in the second example, which is used if we don't want to
reference the iterator for use as a local variable in the loop.

BTW, let's look at the conditional `while` loop right now:

~~~~rust
let mut cake = have_my_cake();
while cake > 0 {
    cake -= 1; // eat it
}
~~~~

Note that for infinite loops, the `loop` keyword is to be preferred to `while
true { }` (which is essentially a hack).
Also, Rust doesn't have the `do { } while;` syntax; you can just use a `loop`
with a breaking condition instead&mdash;`break` will exit a loop while
`continue` will jump to the next iteration.

Now, before looking at the type syntax itself, let's look at the output:

~~~~
Hllo World!
e
~~~~

Well, we did `spawn` a few concurrent tasks. Things are done asynchronously,
which means that one of the tasks may unpredictably end up before the other.
Anyways, spawning threads to print out the letters of a sentence is pretty
silly!

Types and assignment
--------------------

As you can see, variables are declared via the `let` keyword and type
specification is optional (~ML) because Rust has a type inference mechanism,
which means that the variable type is determined at _compile time_&mdash;not to
be confused with dynamic typing, as in Python, where the variable type is
managed at run-time and can be dynamically modified.

**Note: the convention is that variables and function names are_lowercase while
**type names are CamelCase.

Let's have a look at some of the primitive types:

~~~~rust
let a = 3; // considered as `int` by default
let b = "code"; // that would be an `str` - string
let c = [1, 2, 3]; // and that's a `vec` - array (of fixed-length)
let d = true; // bool
~~~~

Rust variables are immutable by default in order to avoid some common errors, so
you need to append the mutable `mut` keyword to `let` in order to reassign a
value&mdash;the compiler will warn you if there are unused `mut`s in your
code.  
**Note: unlike C, for example, Rust does not let you edit an immutable variable
**via its pointer.

Speaking of type assignment, you can force the use of a particular type:

~~~~rust
let a: uint = 3; // unsigned int
let a = 3u; // that's the same, using a short variable suffix for convenience

let mut n = 3; // `n` is supposedly an `int` here...
n = 5u; // but the compiler will infer it as an `uint` from here
let mut h = ~[]; // unknown-type `vec` - won't compile as such
h = ~[1u, 2, 3]; // a `vec` of `uint`s
~~~~

There are other suffixes like `i32` (32-bit integer), `i64`, `f32` (32-bit
float), `f64`... the empty type is called nil and annotated `()`. But remember,
you cannot change the type of a variable during it's lifetime&mdash;static
typing!

Functions will need explicit parameters and return types through. Let's look at
one:

~~~~rust
fn square(x: int) -> int {
    x*x
}

fn main() {
    let x = 3u;
    /* Now, calculate the square. */
    let y = square(x);
    println!("So this gives us {}.", y);
}
~~~~

Ok, but this code will not typecheck because we are passing an unsigned int to a
function that takes an int as parameter; if we were in a situation where we
cannot change the type annotation, we would have to just cast the value of `x`.

Rust has various ways to change variable types, and while they all share
different characteristics, they are also not all possible with all type
combinations. Here are the general rules:

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
       cast      `as T`     ref change-no allocation &rArr; read-only      `&'a T -> &'a U`
------------ ------------- ---------------------------------------------- ------------------
 conversion    `.to_T()`    allocates new memory                              `&T -> ~U`
              `.into_T()`   "in-place" conversion, without copying            `~T -> ~U`
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

You can see `as` as a sole modified reference to a value in memory, while others
change the in-memory representation of the converted variable.  
A research on the [libstd documentation] will tell you which types implement
which of these methods&mdash;in the present case, we would just use a `as` cast,
i.e. `x as uint`.

In Rust, instructions that do not end with semicolons are expressions (not
statements), meaning that they will return their value to the higher-level
block.  
This allows you not only to return from a function but also&mdash;for
example&mdash;to allocate a value based on a test's result. This is valid Rust
code:

~~~~rust
let hype =
    if cake == "KitKat" {
        10
    } else if cake == "Jelly Bean" {
        7
    } else {
        5
    };
~~~~

A last note on types and prints
--------------------------------

Let's go back on a similar example as with the `spawn` before, this time using a
`vec` of chars:

~~~~rust
fn main() {
    let out = ['H', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o'];
    for c in out.iter() { // iterate over `out`
        print!("{}", *c);
    }
}
~~~~

Rust supports UTF-8 (Unicode) natively through the `u8` type (8-bit unsigned
type); strings are essentially just `~[u8]` arrays with a few specific methods
on top of it.  
FYI, there is a blog article that talks about types in Rust and has some
interesting facts, [check it out][rust-types]!

So Rust uses the `print!` and `println!` macros (also called syntax extensions,
ending with `!`) in order to format-print your variables marked as `{}` and
passed as arguments into strings.  
Note that you can [specify the type manually][fmt-types], e.g. `{:u}` means
unsigned integer literal; this will permit compiler type-checking.  
Also, `{:?}` will conveniently raw-print any kind of variable (in particular,
arrays).

Appendix: Going back on macros
------------------------------

Macros are defined as syntax extensions in the sense that they are like scripts,
but are evaluated at *compile-time*. So they serve only the developer by
simplifying/automating things.  
Think about `#define` in C, but macros are much more powerful. Macros have a few
syntax elements of their own; for example, variables get referenced with `$var`,
so that you can differenciate macro variables&mdash;which serve
"internally"&mdash;from actual, real Rust code.

Not elaborating further on it for now but you can have a look at the [mainline
macro tutorial] for some code examples.

Appendix: On functional programming
-----------------------------------

Iterators [have methods][doc-iter] such as `.map()`, `.zip()` and
`.filter()`&mdash;a touch of functional programming which can combine and/or
reuse iterator's values in various ways. So one can write something like
`iterator.map(...).zip(...)` which manages to apply a function to each of the
iterator's element (map) and append another iterator to it as a pair of elements
(zip).

Here is an example using [fold], which can combine an iterator's values:

~~~~rust
let xs = [14, 1, 5, 3, 12];

// this yields -35
let result = xs.iter().fold(0, |accumulator, item| accumulator - *item);
~~~~

This approach is very practical as it keeps code concise and manages to do
various kind of operations on variables quite easily.

Check out the [iterators tutorial] to find out more.

Appendix: Comments and documentation
------------------------------------

You will probably start quickly adding comments to your code (well, you should
anyways!) so let's speak about that now: Rust uses C-style comments and also has
a doc comments system (librustdoc) that's quite similar to [Javadoc], for
example.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Code comments     Global doc comments    Block-level doc comments
---------- ------------------- ---------------------  --------------------------
    inline     `// yuck!`            `//! foo`                `/// bar`
 multiline    `/* yuck! */`        `/*! foo */`             `/** bar */`
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The built-in doc generator (librustdoc) will make pretty HTML documentation out
of these: check out how it looks with the [libstd documentation]!  
All comments accept the [Markdown] syntax and code snippets inside backticks,
like so:

~~~~rust
/*
 * This file is part of my software,
 * licensed under CC0 public domain license.
 */
//! Okay, this file is about providing an
//! interface to the serial device I'm using.
//! All relevant functions are here.

/// This functions returns the current status.
/// true: ok
/// false: err
///
/// # Example
///
/// ```
/// if !reachable() {
///     fail!("Device not responding!");
/// }
/// ```
fn reachable() -> bool {
    foo
}
~~~~

You can learn more about rustdoc intrinsics [here][rustdoc].

Hmm, do you see that `fail!` macro in the example above?  
It is part of a stack of debugging macros, we will have a look at that in the
next chapter.

[cast-ways]: https://github.com/mozilla/rust/wiki/Doc-detailed-release-notes#cast-naming-conventions
[rust-types]: http://jvns.ca/blog/2013/12/02/types-in-rust/
[fmt-types]: http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/master/std/fmt/index.html
[mainline macro tutorial]: http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/master/tutorial-macros.html
[libstd documentation]: http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/master/std/index.html
[doc-iter]: http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/master/std/iter/trait.Iterator.html
[fold]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fold_%28higher-order_function%29
[iterators tutorial]: http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/master/tutorial-container.html#iterators
[Javadoc]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Javadoc
[Markdown]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markdown
[rustdoc]: http://static.rust-lang.org/doc/master/rustdoc.html
[]:
