% Chapter 06

Getting some pointers
=====================

Rust is quite particular when it comes to pointers: it keeps a high-performance
scheme while ensuring safety use patterns (no dangling pointers, etc.).

We will also talk about *ownership* and *lifetimes* in this chapter.

Introduction
------------

First, let's look for a second at how things are laid out in memory. There are
two important [memory pools], the **stack** and the **heap**.

### Simply put

Functions are individual, reusable pieces of code. If we want to directly edit a
variable from the originating (caller) namespace, we need to pass its memory
address, i.e. a pointer to the said variable so that the function knows where to
find it and access it.  

<small>Also, when passing huge structures of data you might want to pass a
pointer to it to save on memory copies but that is a quite sparse use-case as we
will see.</small>

### On stack, and heap

Each application uses a pool of memory called the **stack**, of fixed-size,
allocated when a task starts up. There are various mechanisms occuring inside
the stack but it is mostly hosting all *local variables* and parameters used
along the execution. When a function is called, the existing registers are saved
on memory and the program jumps to the function and creates a new stack frame
for it. The stack also traces the order in which functions are called so that
function returns occur correctly. The default stack size of a Rust task is 2
MiB.  
So, we need to pass a memory address in order to be able to edit a variable from
the caller's namespace &ndash; that is the main reason why we use pointers.

A program can also dynamically request memory with the unused memory in the
computer, managed by the OS: this is called the **heap**. All dynamically-sized
types (DST) are stored on the heap with an OS allocation.  
The heap can only be accessed via a pointer located on the stack since it is not
the default memory pool, these pointers create a **box**.

So, an `int` has a fixed-size in memory and is stack-allocated. A dynamic-array
`~[]`, a string `~str` or anything `~` is allocated on the heap (that is where
you would use `malloc` in C or `new` in C++).

Different kinds
---------------

Rust has two primary pointer types: the borrowed reference (using the `&`
symbol) and the owned pointer (indicated by `~`).

### Referencing

Referencing is also called borrowing because creating a reference freezes the
target variable, i.e. it cannot be freed nor transfered (so no use-after-free).
When the reference gets out of scope and freed, it is available again to the
caller.
References use the `&` operator, just like C pointers; or `&mut` with
mutability, which need to point to uniquely referenced, mutable
data &ndash; everything is statically checked.

This would be the most basic example:

~~~~rust
let x = 3;
{
    y = &x; // `x` is now frozen and cannot be modified
    // ...but it can be read since the borrow is immutable
}
// `x` can be accessed again (`y` is out of scope)
~~~~

A borrow cannot outlive the variable it originates from: it has a **lifetime**,
meaning that you will have to change your allocation pattern if a reference
outlives its lifetime, like here:

~~~~rust
let mut x = &3;
{
    let mut y = 4;
    x = &y;
} // `y` is freed here, but `x` still lives...
~~~~

This pattern will be rejected, since `y` has a shorter lifetime than `x`.  
The compiler enforces valid references and yields:

~~~~bash
error: borrowed value does not live long enough
~~~~

**Note:** there are a few cases through like when returning a reference passed
to a function where you will need to add a lifetime annotation, so that it is
inferred from the caller; more on that a bit later.

Referencing is the default choice as a pointer: all checks are performed at
compile-time (by the borrow checker) so its footprint is that of a C pointer
(which is also available in Rust as `unsafe`, `*` pointer).  
The unary star operator `*` also serves for dereferencing, like in C.

### Unique ownership

An owned pointer owns a certain (dynamically allocated) part of the heap, i.e.
the owner is the only one who can access the data &ndash; unless it transfers
ownership, at which point the compiler will free the memory automatically
(pointer is copied, but not the value).

~~~~rust
fn take<T>(ptr: ~T) { // works for any type, `T`
    ...
}

let m = ~"Hello!";
take(m);
take_again(m); // ERROR: `m` is moved
~~~~

Note that owned pointers can, like most objects, be borrowed. You can also
copy a unique pointer using `.clone()`, but this is an expensive operation.

### Shared pointers

"Shared" may evoke Garbage Collection to you. Well, this is partly the case.

Using only owned and borrowed pointers, ownership forms a [DAG], while shared
pointers allow multiple pointers to the same object and cycles. There are few of
them, either GC-managed (with immutability to prevent data races), or Reference
counted with specific types that allow thread-sharing or mutability, for
instance. Note that Rust also has, of course, mutable shared pointer types.

**Note:** As you can see, these pointers serve a particular purpose. You should
not have to look at them until they are needed in one of your programs.

First and foremost, please note that the new tracing, task-local Garbage
Collection algorithm that will be introduced into the standard library is being
worked on right now.  
So, there used to be an `@` managed pointer type, but it has been phased out in
favor of `std::rc::Rc` and `std::gc::Gc`; which are standard library types.
Right now, `Gc` is just a wrapper around `Rc`, which manually counts references,
meaning less overhead than a GC algorithm (which periodically checks for pointer
references) but it has a few limitations, e.g. it will leak memory on cycles
(recursive data structures and the likes).

**Note:** task-local (or per-thread) GC is an important part of the deal because
it means that you can have a task which handles low-latency jobs and is manually
managed and another that can just run GC; task local also means that you can't
pass these pointers between tasks, which can be desired in some cases.

Okay, let's have a look at some of these "smart pointers":

- First, if we want mutability inside of our `Gc`/`Rc` types, we will have to
  use `Cell` or `RefCell`, depending on whether the contained type is `Pod` or
  not (`Pod` is whatever type can be copied with a `memcpy` instruction, i.e.
  bool, integers, floats, char, `&`/`*` and all types that are construction of
  these all): `Pod` can use `Cell`, everything else will use `RefCell`.  
  You can see `Pod` as every type that has a fixed size and where you do not
  need to dereference it in order to access the content (that includes `struct`
  of `Pod` types, tuples, etc. but not dynamic vectors for instance).
- We have said that `Gc` uses immutable, thread-local data. If we want to share
  data **across threads**, we would have to use a variant of `Rc`: `Arc`, i.e.
  *Atomically Reference Counted*. As the name suggests, it will make RefCount an
  atomic (insecable) operation (using [Fetch-and-add] on modern processors) so
  that it avoids data races where threads would access/modify the count at the
  same time.
- What if we want **cross-thread mutability**? `Arc<Cell<>>` is not allowed
  since it would break atomicity, so there is a special type for that:
  `MutexArc`, internally using mutexes to prevent data races.  
  There is a variant called `RWArc` that uses a [Readers–writer lock], making it
  more efficient in the case where you have lots of readers.

The Edge-cases
--------------

### References and lifetimes

Okay, let's use a silly example involving a function return:

~~~~rust
fn take(x: &int) -> &int {
    x
}

fn main() {
    let x = 4;
    println!("{}", *take(&x));
}
~~~~

You are probably thinking that `x` outlives its lifetime; that's where it is:

~~~~bash
error: cannot infer an appropriate lifetime due to conflicting requirements
~~~~

It doesn't end there through, since we can pass a lifetime parameter from the
caller to the function:

~~~~rust
fn take<'a>(ptr: &'a int) -> &'a int {
    ptr
}

fn main() {
    let x = 4;
    println!("{}", *take(&x));
}
~~~~

As you can see here, we define `'a` as a parameter (the single quotation mark
prefix denoting a lifetime), and annotate it to both the value being passed
and the return value. In short, the return value will inherit the lifetime of
the parameter.  
Since `x` is still alive until the end of `main()` &ndash; the caller function,
this pattern is valid and typechecks.

So generally speaking, if you want to return a borrowed value (eventually with
a condition evaluation for instance), you will have to use that.  
This is particularly useful if you want to modify a variable in-place (that is,
without having to pass it as heap pointer), in which case you can take a mutable
borrow `&mut` with a lifetime annotation.

You can also annotate lifetime parameters to several variables, in which case
the compiler will pick the lowest. This is useful when your output depends on a
few variables:

~~~~rust
fn max<'a>(x: &'a int, y: &'a int) -> &'a int {
    if (*x >= *y) {
        x
    } else {
        y
    }
}
~~~~

Lastly, there is a `'static` lifetime, which you want to use outside of any
brace scope and does not expire. As an example, here is how rust defines its bug
report URL string:

~~~~rust
static BUG_REPORT_URL: &'static str = "...url...";
~~~~

[memory pools]: http://stackoverflow.com/a/1213360
[DAG]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph
[Fetch-and-add]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fetch-and-add
[Readers–writer lock]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Readers%E2%80%93writer_lock
[]: